IA update - creates Asset Hub page for Protocol section (#112)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: polkadot-protocol/architecture/system-chains/asset-hub.md

## Assets Pallet

The Polkadot SDK's Assets pallet is a powerful module designated for creating and managing fungible asset classes with a fixed supply. It offers a secure and flexible way to issue, transfer, freeze, and destroy assets. The pallet supports various operations and includes permissioned and non-permissioned functions to cater to simple and advanced use cases.

Visit the [Assets Pallet Rust docs](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_assets/index.html){target=\_blank} for more in-depth information.

### Key Features

Key features of the Assets pallet include:

- **Asset issuance** - allows the creation of a new asset, where the total supply is assigned to the creator's account
- **Asset transfer** - enables transferring assets between accounts while maintaining a balance in both accounts
- **Asset freezing** - prevents transfers of a specific asset from one account, locking it from further transactions
- **Asset destruction** - allows accounts to burn or destroy their holdings, removing those assets from circulation

> - **Approval-based transfers** - a non-custodial mechanism to enable one account to approve a transfer of assets on behalf of another

Reviewer: Do you want to give this the same name you give it down below?
**Non-Custodial Transfers (Approval API)**

---
title: Asset Hub
description: Learn about Asset Hub in Polkadot, managing on-chain assets, foreign asset integration, and using XCM for cross-chain asset transfers.
---

# Asset Hub

## Introduction

> The Asset Hub is a critical component in the Polkadot ecosystem, enabling the management of fungible and non-fungible assets across the network. Since the relay chain focuses on maintaining security and consensus without direct asset management, Asset Hub provides a streamlined platform for creating, managing, and using on-chain assets in a fee-efficient manner. This guide outlines the core features of Asset Hub, including how it handles asset operations, cross-chain transfers, and asset integration using XCM, as well as essential tools like API Sidecar and TxWrapper for developers working with on-chain assets.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should link these tools appropriately?

Author: I will link here to their sections further down in the document. The individual sections have links to the source code, etc. Cleaner this way, I think.

- **Payment of transaction fees with non-native assets** - users can pay transaction fees in assets other than the native token (DOT or KSM), offering more flexibility for developers and users

Assets created on the Asset Hub are stored as part of a map, where each asset has a unique ID that links to information about the asset, including details like:

- The management team
- The total supply
- The number of accounts holding the asset
- Sufficiency for account existence - whether the asset alone is enough to maintain an account without a native token balance
- The metadata of the asset, including its name, symbol, and the number of decimals for representation

Some assets can be regarded as sufficient to maintain an account's existence, meaning that users can create accounts on the network without needing a native token balance (i.e., no existential deposit required). Developers can also set minimum balances for their assets. If an account's balance drops below the minimum, the balance is considered dust and may be cleared.

## Assets Pallet

> The Polkadot SDK's Assets pallet is a powerful tool for creating and managing fungible asset classes with a fixed supply. It offers a secure and flexible way to issue, transfer, freeze, and destroy assets. The pallet supports various operations and includes permissioned and non-permissioned functions to cater to simple and advanced use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Polkadot SDK's Assets pallet is a powerful module designiated for creating and managing fungible asset classes with a fixed supply. It offers a secure and flexible way to issue, transfer, freeze, and destroy assets. The pallet supports various operations and includes permissioned and non-permissioned functions to cater to simple and advanced use cases.
```

> For full details, see the [assets pallet repository](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/substrate/frame/assets){target=\_blank}, which contains reference documentation and examples of how to interact with the pallet.

Reviewer 2: I would recommend this as the link instead, reads a bit better: https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_assets/index.html

- **Asset freezing** - prevents transfers of a specific asset from one account, locking it from further transactions
- **Asset destruction** - allows accounts to burn or destroy their holdings, removing those assets from circulation
- **Approval-based transfers** - a non-custodial mechanism to enable one account to approve a transfer of assets on behalf of another

### Main Functions

The Assets pallet provides a broad interface for managing fungible assets. Some of the main dispatchable functions include:

- **`create()`** - create a new asset class by placing a deposit, applicable when asset creation is permissionless
- **`issue()`** - mint a fixed supply of a new asset and assign it to the creator's account
- **`transfer()`** - transfer a specified amount of an asset between two accounts
- **`approve_transfer()`** - approve a non-custodial transfer, allowing a third party to move assets between accounts
- **`destroy()`** - destroy an entire asset class, removing it permanently from the chain
- **`freeze()`** and **`thaw()`** - administrators or privileged users can lock or unlock assets from being transferred

> For a full list of dispatchable and privileged functions, see the [Call Enum Rust docs](https://docs.rs/pallet-assets/latest/pallet_assets/pallet/enum.Call.html){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a full list of dispatchable and privileged functions, see the [dispatchables located in the Rust Docs](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_assets/pallet/dispatchables/index.html){target=\_blank}.
```

> ### Public Functions

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if we should use the term "public functions" - maybe "queryable", or something along those lines? They're functions that query chain state / storage mappings

- **Asset identifier** - unlike native assets, foreign assets are identified using an XCM Multilocation rather than a simple numeric `AssetId`. This multilocation identifier represents the cross-chain location of the asset and provides a standardized way to reference it across different parachains and relay chains

- **Transfers** - once registered in the Asset Hub, foreign assets can be transferred between accounts, just like native assets. Users can also send these assets back to their originating blockchain if supported by the relevant cross-chain messaging mechanisms

## Integration

Asset Hub supports a variety of integration tools that make it easy for developers to manage assets and interact with the blockchain in their applications. The tools and libraries provided by Parity Technologies enable streamlined operations, such as querying asset information, building transactions, and monitoring cross-chain asset transfers.

Developers can integrate Asset Hub into their projects using these core tools:

> ### API Sidecar

Reviewer 2: For these tools - is it a good idea to just mention them here, when beyond AssetHub, you could use them for any parachain?

Author: As someone new to the eco, this reads to me like API Sidecar is a tool I can use with any Kusama or Polkadot node, so it makes sense to me. I feel the same about the TxWrapper part. I will defer to you and @nhussein11, though. Just let me know if you want me to remove these or do something else.

[API Sidecar](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate-api-sidecar){target=\_blank} is a RESTful service that can be deployed alongside Polkadot and Kusama nodes. It provides endpoints to retrieve real-time blockchain data, including asset information. For Asset Hub, Sidecar allows querying:

- **Asset look-ups** - retrieve specific assets using `AssetId`
- **Asset balances** - view the balance of a particular asset on Asset Hub

Public instances of API Sidecar connected to Asset Hub are available, such as:

- [Polkadot Asset Hub Sidecar](https://polkadot-asset-hub-public-sidecar.parity-chains.parity.io/){target=\_blank}
- [Kusama Asset Hub Sidecar](https://kusama-asset-hub-public-sidecar.parity-chains.parity.io/){target=\_blank}

These public instances are primarily for ad-hoc testing and quick checks.

> ### TxWrapper

Reviewer 2: Same for TxWrapper

Author: See above re: API sidecar

Key features include:

- Support for cross-chain transfers between parachains
- Streamlined transaction construction with support for the necessary parachain metadata

The API supports various asset operations, such as paying transaction fees with non-native tokens and managing asset liquidity.

### Parachain Node

To fully leverage the Asset Hub's functionality, developers will need to run a system parachain node. Setting up an Asset Hub node allows users to interact with the parachain in real time, syncing data and participating in the broader Polkadot ecosystem. Guidelines for setting up an [Asset Hub node](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/cumulus#asset-hub-){target=\_blank} are available in the Parity documentation.

Using these integration tools, developers can manage assets seamlessly and integrate Asset Hub functionality into their applications, leveraging Polkadot's powerful infrastructure.

> ## XCM Transfer Monitoring

Reviewer 2: This feels like it should be in another page, but in the future maybe we can consider moving out as it's out of scope for this PR.
